Introduction to Docker

Docker packages an application together with its runtime, libraries and settings into an image. A container is a running instance of an image. Because the image carries everything the app needs, it runs the same way on a laptop, a CI runner or a server.

Writing a Dockerfile

A Dockerfile is a list of instructions that build an image layer by layer:
    FROM python:3.11-slim
    WORKDIR /app
    COPY requirements.txt .
    RUN pip install --no-cache-dir -r requirements.txt
    COPY . .
    EXPOSE 8000
    CMD ["uvicorn", "main:app", "--host", "0.0.0.0", "--port", "8000"]

Copying requirements.txt before the rest of the source code lets Docker reuse the cached pip install layer when only the code changes, which makes rebuilds much faster.

Docker Compose

Docker Compose runs several containers together from a single docker-compose.yml file. Each entry under services becomes a container. The whole stack starts with docker-compose up --build and stops with docker-compose down.

Compose puts all services on a shared network where each service name works as a hostname. A backend container reaches an Ollama container at http://ollama:11434, not http://localhost:11434, because localhost inside a container refers to that container itself.

depends_on controls start order. On its own it only waits for the other container to start. With condition: service_healthy it waits until that service's healthcheck passes.

Named Volumes

A container's filesystem is thrown away when the container is removed. Named volumes are storage managed by Docker that lives outside any container, so data written there survives docker-compose down and rebuilt images. docker-compose down -v deletes the volumes as well.

    volumes:
      - chroma_data:/app/rag_db

Environment Variables

Configuration such as URLs, model names and paths should come from environment variables instead of being hardcoded. Compose can set them with environment: or load a whole file with env_file:. A .env file usually holds local values and is kept out of version control, while a .env.example file documents the variables and is committed.
